### [Project file]
## Some Key Findings
* Staten Island's median household income (**$91,310** - 1st) is only 27.367% more than the 4th ranked borough (**Brooklyn - $71,690**), but is 100% more than the 5th ranked borough (**The Bronx - $45,640**).
* It's more likely for a violent crime to be committed in the Bronx (**.942%**), than it is likely for any crime to be committed in Staten Island (**.711%**)
* Queens (**22,791.630 persons per sq mi**) is 4th in population density. It is 168.413% more dense than the 5th ranked borough (**Staten Island - 8,491.235 persons per sq mi**).
* If the other 4 boroughs merged, Manhattan (**71,776.275 persons per sq mi**) would still be more densely populated by more than double.

## Analysis
Poverty & proximity are two factors of crime. The Bronx's crime rate is just under 2%, whereas the citywide rate is 1.5%. Upon taking a deeper look into NYC's poorest borough by far, 48.478% of the crimes committed are violent. Almost half of all crimes will be murders, r*pes, assaults, and/or robberies. Comparatively, only 36.339% of citywide crimes are violent. None of the other boroughs have a percentage share of violent crimes that breach 40%. Widespread poverty is a major influence to crime in the Bronx, but what about proximity? Two-thirds (8/12) of the Bronx's precincts are more dense than the city's population density, with an aggregate density of 51,373.641 persons per sq. mile, 76% more than the city's. The crime rate of those 8 is 2.07% and 51.566% of all crime is violent. On the contrast, the 4 precincts with lower indivdual population densities aggregate to 20,404.204 persons per sq. mile and 1.66% crime rate. The violent crime share drops drastically from 51.566% to 39.921%. Safe to say that proximitiy amplifies Bronx crime.

Staten Island is a borough on the complete opposite side to the Bronx. Median household income is higher in Staten Island than in any other borough. The city's crime rate and population density is more than double and triple Staten Island's, respectively. The city of Phoenix (1.625M) would have to move to Staten Island in order for the population density equal to NYC's, 29,179.161 persons per sq. mile. Yet, Phoenix's population is still smaller than Brooklyn's and Queens'. It's pretty straight forward; Staten Island is not packed nor poor.

The heart of New York City, Manhattan, is quite the anamoly. Manhattan is a close 2nd in median houshold income, $89,590. Many accept the notion that poverty is a driving force behind crime. With that in mind, Manhattan should have a very low crime rate. Right? It turns out Manhattan has the highest crime rate of all the 5 boroughs, at 2.16%. The silver lining is that 72% of Manhattan crime is non-violent. Although Manhattan's population density is higher than any of the NYC boroughs, where most of the crime occurs is in the borough's 2nd least dense precinct, 14th / Midtown South Precinct. At 33,316.576 persons per sq mile, the MTS Precinct is similar to city's density but less than half of Manhattan's. The kicker is MTS has a 17.487% crime rate. The 70/30 non-violent to violent split remains, yet the rate jumps more than 700%. This instance, we see low proximity, high crime. The MTS Precinct's crime rate weighs so much into Manhttan's crime rate, excluding the precinct drops the rate to 1.923%. If the precinct with the 2nd highest crime rate, 18th, was instead excluded, the rate decreases from 2.16% to 2.061%. The Midtown South Precinct covers hot spots like The Empire State Building, Penn Station and Times Square. These attractions get thousands of passerbys weekly that ultimately do not count towards the population of the area, as they do not live there. So when data shows MTS and the 60th Precinct have similar population densities, it is easy to get fooled without any nuance. 

## Sources
* [Median household income](https://furmancenter.org/neighborhoods)
* [Crime stats](https://www.nyc.gov/site/nypd/stats/crime-statistics/borough-and-precinct-crime-stats.page#bronx)
* [Precinct area / populations](https://nyc.maps.arcgis.com/apps/instant/sidebar/index.html?appid=8153f961507040de8dbf9a53145f18c4)
